# Q1
## Q1(a)
* The linux process life-cycle
* 5 primary states:
  1. New        - Process is being created but is not yet ready for execution
  2. Ready      - Process is ready for execution but is waiting for CPU allocation
  3. Running    - Process is executing on the CPU
  4. Blocked    - Process is waiting for a resource or I/O operation to complete
  5. Terminated - Process has finished execution or been killed

* Transitions
* New
  * New -> Ready (after initialisation)
* Ready
  * Ready -> Running (scheduler dispatches it)
  * Ready -> Terminated (if killed)
* Running
  * Running -> Ready (scheduler pre-empts it)
  * Running -> Blocked (waits for resource or I/O)
  * Running -> Terminated (exits)
* Blocked
  * Blocked -> Ready (resource becomes available)
* Terminated. Final state, no transitions

* The role of the os scheduler is to manage state transitions between Ready and Running states
* Dispatches a process from the Ready cue and transitions it to running 
* Preempts a process where it interupts it, transitioning it from running to ready
* Uses algorithms to determine which Ready process gets CPU time next
* Ensures that Blocked processes transition back to Ready when the I/O is complete
* Load balances processes across available CPUs on multi-core systems

## Q1(b)
* execlp()
* Takes the program name as the first arg and searches for it in $PATH
* Replaces calling process instead of creating a new one

## Q1(c)
* Heap
  * vals' actual content
    * block of memory allocated by malloc() containing 10 integers 
* Text
  * Compiled executable code
* Initialised data
  * int a = 2;
* Uninitialised data
  * int b;
* Stack
  * local variables and parameters
  * int *vals;
    * the pointer address returned by malloc()
  * int i;
    * the loop counter values 0-9

## Q1(d)
* Why an executable program compiled on one system may not be executable on another system 
* Different CPU architecture
* Different OS
* Big vs Little Endian
* Library dependencies
* Kernel versions


# Q2
## Q2(a)
* Amdahl's law. 25% serial for 5 processors
* 1 / (serial + ((paralell)/processors))
  * 1 / (0.25 + (0.75/5) = 1 / (0.25+0.15) = 1/0.4 = 2.5
* Maximum speedup: 2.5x

## Q2(b)
* void increment(atomic_int *v)
  * int expected = *v;
  * compare_and_swap(v, expected, expected+1);

## Q2(c)
* Gantt Chart
| Time | 0 | 1 | 5 | 10 | 17 |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Process | P1 | P2 | P4 | P1 | P3|

# Q3
## Q3(a)
* A race condition is when the result of a process is dependant on the order of thread / process execution.
* This counter++ example can lead to a race condition as the result of one thread depends on if the other thread has already incremented the counter.
* avoid with a mutex lock or atomic variable type

## Q3(b)
* wait() pauses operation until the resource is available and then claims control of it when its free
* signal() relinquishes control of the shared resource
* busy waiting can be avoided by having the process state transition to blocked until signal() directly wakes it

## Q3(c)
* 4 conditions for a deadlock
  1. mutual exclusion
  2. hold and wait
  3. no preemption
  4. circular wait
* program creates a deadlock because each thread starts by acquiring a lock then trying to acquire the lock already acquired by the other thread.
* mutual exclusion. lines 2,3 create the mutex locks
* hold and wait. lines 7,8 and 14,15 hold one lock then wait for the other without releasing the first
* no preemption. lines 7-11 and 14-18 have no way for another thread to forcibly acquire the locks.
* circular wait. lines 8 and 15 are 2 threads waiting for eachother 

# Q4
## Q4(a)
* "ABC"

## Q4(b)
* hard links create a mirror or copy of the target. soft links only point to the target
* hard links are not allowed for directories because it would allow a directory to contain itself, therefor breaking the linux filesystem 

## Q4(c)
* i) Page tables translate virtual addresses to physical addresses.
  * In a 32-bit virtual address: the first 20 bits are the virtual page number (VPN). last 12 bits are the offset within the page.
* ii) small page size implies less memory fragmentation but requires more lookups

## Q4(d)
* chmod 711 myfile
* chmod changes the permissions of a given file
* first argument consists of 3 numbers: 1. file owner 2. users in file group 3. others
* chmod 711 sets permissions of myfile such that the owner can read write and execute, group and others can only execute
